README.md, before:

# Mission

Software development is a vast field requiring different skills and consists of various rituals. Coding is just a part of the puzzle.

Aspiring software developers start with learning to code with a focus on mastering a programming language. The programming landscape involves developing an understanding of fundamental building blocks offered by the language, toolset and idioms around the eco system.

Novice programmers would greately benefit by getting code reviewed by more experienced developers. Understanding the tradeoffs across different implementations from performance, extensibility and maintainability offers a more enriching experience in the path to learning software development.

As part of Code Insights Initiative, we offer a collaborative environment novice programmers to learn and master the craft of software development by engaging with professionals.

# Requirements

The initiative is open to programmers looking forward to enhance their skills and learn the real world requirement from a software developer.

This is not an initiative to teach the basics of programming language. This is more an opportunity to enhance and hone the skills from a software industry perspective.

# Collaboration

Slack/Discord are used for initiating the onboarding.

Based on initial and superficial comparison of the 2 popular platforms, Discord appears to help less restrictions and limits for free accounts.

## Getting started


### Java development environment

The immdeiate focus of the initiative is to offer a platform for AP Computer Science students. The course uses Java 11 for programming. Please ensure you have a local development environment setup.

### Using git

[`git`](https://git-scm.com) is a distributed version control system. It allows you to keep track of change history across software development. Some of the largest software source code is managed under `git`. The [Linux kernel](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/about/) and [Android source code](https://android.googlesource.com/?format=HTML) are some examples of `git` popularity.

[Pro Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) book is a great source to learn `git`. For those keen on learning `git` by watching videos, there are additional [git learning resources](https://git-scm.com/doc)

Learning to use `git` is an activity in itself and an extremely useful tool to learn and use. There are both command line `git` client and those with a graphical user interface (GUI).

1. [GUI based `git` clients](https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis)
2. Command line `git` clients
	* [Installing on Mac OS](https://git-scm.com/download/mac) has 2 options. Apple Xcode has `git` bundled in it OR via [homebrew](https://brew.sh). It is recommended to install it via `brew` since there are other useful tools that can be installed from `brew` later
	* Building from source for the brave. Building software requires you to install dependency libraries before you can attempt to build. This is a time consuming process, however, it also teaches common paradigms to build, install and use open source software. [`git` source tarball](https://mirrors.edge.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/) for released versions of `git` can be downloaded and built

#### Recommendation
Installing a GUI based `git` client like SourceTree is a more gentler introduction to `git`. However, learning to use `git` in the shell (command line) will help you learn and use the full power of `git`

### GitHub account

Collaboration and code reviews are done on [GitHub](https://www.github.com/), an online `git` repository hosting service.

### Onboarding

There are two main roles in this initiative, the apprentice and the shepherd. This is an apprentice driven program with assistance from shepherd to guide them along the journey.

#### Apprentice

Code insights initiative is an organization in GitHub terminology. You must be part of the organization before you can tap into the resources.

1. Once you have created a GitHub user account, please send the account username and email to the maintainer of the organization
2. You will then be added as a member of the organization. This will allow you to create public/private repositories under the organization
3. Every apprentince is part of `apprentices` team
4. Private repositories are private to the apprentice and would require giving explicit `READ` permission to the `shepherds`. If you prefer to pick a specific user to review your code, you can give the individual account permission to `READ` your private repository

##### Attention
* Do not give access to all by default. You do not want plagarism and misuse of your hard work
* When in doubt setting up permissions, please reach out to `admins` OR `shepherds` for help

#### Shepherd

Role of an experienced developer is to help guide the apprentice learn and acquire the important skills that are usually not documented in a structured manner. We are reaching out to developers in software industry to help by contributing their time and expertise to review code and provide feedback that helps an apprentice to develop different perspectives around the code they write. Parents of aspiring `apprentices` are a very good source of `shepherds`.

An aspiring shepherd willing to help would need the following

* Create a GitHub account
* Share your GitHub username and email address used in GitHub with the maintainer of the organization
* You will be added to `shepherds` team
* When an apprentice creates a repository and posts their code, they will reach out the `shepherds` for assistance
* Shepherds are requested to collaborate among themselves and pick up reviews. We do not have an automatic task assignmment yet.
* It is highly desirable if `shepherds` are willing to impart knowledge through occasional video calls. This will help a larger group of `apprentices` benefit as against depending solely on individual reviews.

## Workflows


# Additional links

Commit message:

Background story leading to the initiative

README.md, after:

# Mission

Software development is a vast field requiring different skills and consists of various rituals. Coding is just a part of the puzzle.

Aspiring software developers start with learning to code with a focus on mastering a programming language. The programming landscape involves developing an understanding of fundamental building blocks offered by the language, toolset and idioms around the eco system.

Novice programmers would greately benefit by getting code reviewed by more experienced developers. Understanding the tradeoffs across different implementations from performance, extensibility and maintainability offers a more enriching experience in the path to learning software development.

As part of Code Insights Initiative, we offer a collaborative environment novice programmers to learn and master the craft of software development by engaging with professionals.

For the keen and interested, please read the [background leading the code insights initiative](background.md).

# Requirements

The initiative is open to programmers looking forward to enhance their skills and learn the real world requirement from a software developer.

This is not an initiative to teach the basics of programming language. This is more an opportunity to enhance and hone the skills from a software industry perspective.

# Collaboration

Slack/Discord are used for initiating the onboarding.

Based on initial and superficial comparison of the 2 popular platforms, Discord appears to help less restrictions and limits for free accounts.

# Getting started


## Java development environment

The immdeiate focus of the initiative is to offer a platform for AP Computer Science students. The course uses Java 11 for programming. Please ensure you have a local development environment setup.

## Using git

[`git`](https://git-scm.com) is a distributed version control system. It allows you to keep track of change history across software development. Some of the largest software source code is managed under `git`. The [Linux kernel](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/about/) and [Android source code](https://android.googlesource.com/?format=HTML) are some examples of `git` popularity.

[Pro Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) book is a great source to learn `git`. For those keen on learning `git` by watching videos, there are additional [git learning resources](https://git-scm.com/doc)

Learning to use `git` is an activity in itself and an extremely useful tool to learn and use. There are both command line `git` client and those with a graphical user interface (GUI).

1. [GUI based `git` clients](https://git-scm.com/downloads/guis)
2. Command line `git` clients
	* [Installing on Mac OS](https://git-scm.com/download/mac) has 2 options. Apple Xcode has `git` bundled in it OR via [homebrew](https://brew.sh). It is recommended to install it via `brew` since there are other useful tools that can be installed from `brew` later
	* Building from source for the brave. Building software requires you to install dependency libraries before you can attempt to build. This is a time consuming process, however, it also teaches common paradigms to build, install and use open source software. [`git` source tarball](https://mirrors.edge.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/) for released versions of `git` can be downloaded and built

### Recommendation
Installing a GUI based `git` client like SourceTree is a more gentler introduction to `git`. However, learning to use `git` in the shell (command line) will help you learn and use the full power of `git`

## GitHub account

Collaboration and code reviews are done on [GitHub](https://www.github.com/), an online `git` repository hosting service.

## Onboarding

There are two main roles in this initiative, the apprentice and the shepherd. This is an apprentice driven program with assistance from shepherd to guide them along the journey.

### Apprentice

Code insights initiative is an organization in GitHub terminology. You must be part of the organization before you can tap into the resources.

1. Once you have created a GitHub user account, please send the account username and email to the maintainer of the organization
2. You will then be added as a member of the organization. This will allow you to create public/private repositories under the organization
3. Every apprentince is part of `apprentices` team
4. Private repositories are private to the apprentice and would require giving explicit `READ` permission to the `shepherds`. If you prefer to pick a specific user to review your code, you can give the individual account permission to `READ` your private repository

#### Attention
* Do not give access to all by default. You do not want plagarism and misuse of your hard work
* When in doubt setting up permissions, please reach out to `admins` OR `shepherds` for help

### Shepherd

Role of an experienced developer is to help guide the apprentice learn and acquire the important skills that are usually not documented in a structured manner. We are reaching out to developers in software industry to help by contributing their time and expertise to review code and provide feedback that helps an apprentice to develop different perspectives around the code they write. Parents of aspiring `apprentices` are a very good source of `shepherds`.

An aspiring shepherd willing to help would need the following

* Create a GitHub account
* Share your GitHub username and email address used in GitHub with the maintainer of the organization
* You will be added to `shepherds` team
* When an apprentice creates a repository and posts their code, they will reach out the `shepherds` for assistance
* Shepherds are requested to collaborate among themselves and pick up reviews. We do not have an automatic task assignmment yet.
* It is highly desirable if `shepherds` are willing to impart knowledge through occasional video calls. This will help a larger group of `apprentices` benefit as against depending solely on individual reviews.

## Workflows
TBD


# Additional links

* [Story behind the initiative](background.md): This is my story leading to starting this initiative. Would love to hear more stories that led to people joining this initiative. Contributions are welcome, we will publish them here.
